So, you're giving a presentation and
it's going great, but all of a sudden
the mic cuts out. Or perhaps you're
giving a presentation, it's going really
well, but then the slides behind you
stop working. Or you've prepared for a
presentation and you're ready to take
the stage and then the event organizer
tells you, "Oh, you need to shorten it
by 20 minutes or you need to lengthen it
by 20 minutes." or it's a few days away
from a presentation and all of a sudden
you start to feel sick.
What do you do in these situations?
These are public speaking nightmares.
And it's difficult enough. Public
speaking is the most common personal
fear in the world. And what makes it 10x
harder is when something goes wrong
right before or perhaps during the
presentation. But the good news is in
this video I am going to walk through
these nightmare situations and explain
to you how you can not only get through
them but still deliver a professional,
acceptable presentation and do so in a
way that makes you look like quite the
communicator. One of the most common
public speaking nightmares is what if my
microphone cuts out mid presentation?
And if this happens, what amateur
speakers will often do is they'll panic
and they'll draw a lot of attention to
the fact that the microphone's not
working and they'll be frantically
looking around the room to see who can
fix this situation.
But what's a much better approach is to
stay calm. Set the microphone aside and
project your voice loudly to the best of
your ability. Make sure that people can
hear you and you can make a comment
like, "All right, time to use my natural
microphone."
I've seen some polished speakers who
will actually come off the stage and
walk a little bit closer to the audience
while projecting their voice to ensure
that they can hear them as well as
possible. And what you need to know is,
especially if it's a big enough event,
the AV team is probably already well
aware of the fact that your mic isn't
working. They're probably on a solution
already. They're putting batteries and a
backup microphone and somebody's going
to run that to you in a few seconds. But
the more calm you can stay and not draw
attention to the fact that this issue
has happened, it's going to come across
incredibly professional.
If you need to try to maybe make eye
contact and a subtle gesture with the
event coordinator, but don't start
blaming people. Don't start getting
frustrated.
adapt to the situation and you'll be
surprised how quickly it gets fixed and
how your audience sees you as a
professional. Another public speaking
nightmare that can happen from time to
time is you're giving a presentation and
all of a sudden your slides or your
PowerPoint cut out or they stop working
or a video doesn't play properly.
I have seen this happen so many times
and what amateur speakers will do is
they'll panic. They'll freak out and
they'll say, "Oh, sorry. This is
supposed to be working." Um, and
everything will freeze.
What you need to know is that depending
on the context of the room. So if you
are presenting to hundreds of people and
there is an AV team there who is
responsible for the audiovisisual
they are already working on the
solution. So the fact that it's not
working properly they're already trying
to fix it. So there's no point you
drawing more attention to the issue. I
would challenge you to be prepared for
this type of situation. Even when you're
practicing your speech, imagine to
yourself, could I do an unplugged
version of this? What if the slide
stopped working? Would I still be able
to give a presentation? And one tool you
can use in this situation is diving into
stories. If you have a relevant story
that attaches to the point that you were
making when the slide stopped working,
by stepping away and starting to tell
this story, the audience is going to
forget about the tech issue. You're
going to buy some time for hopefully
somebody to be able to fix it. And by
the end of your story, you may be able
to transition right back into picking up
where those slides left off. In another
situation, sometimes we're in a smaller
room and there is no AV team. It's just
us and our computer. So, if there's
something that's obvious that you think
you can fix quickly, you can give it a
few seconds to try to figure it out, but
you don't want to bring your speech to a
screeching halt. So, if your computer
has completely frozen, something's not
working, try to do the unplugged
version. Don't lean on your slides.
Slides are great to have as something in
addition to our presentation, but don't
be mistaken. They are not the
presentation. You and whatever you're
saying is what matters most. So, do your
best to adapt when these situations
happen and your slides stop working. So,
you've prepared a presentation. You show
up to the venue. You're about 20 minutes
from taking the stage, and the event
organizer comes up to you and says, "Oh,
by the way, we're running a little bit
late. You need to reduce your
presentation by 30 minutes." Or, "Oh, by
the way, this wasn't mentioned to you,
but you actually need to speak for 90
minutes instead of 60 minutes."
This can be a daunting situation,
especially if you have practiced and
practiced and practiced and you have
your timing down. But there are a couple
ways you can adapt to this situation
like a professional.
If you are asked to shorten your speech
with very little notice, what you want
to do is think about what is the most
important information that I need to get
across. So, for example, if your
presentation was five ways to level up
your social media in 2026,
the halfhour version might be three ways
to level up your social media in 2026.
Or if you were asked to give a longer
version, perhaps you still give those
five tips, but now you use half an hour
to a group discussion to get audience
participation to find out ways that they
are using social media in innovative
ways. And by opening up this dialogue,
you're making your presentation more
immersive and you are adding on to the
total amount of time. If you're in a
tight situation and you really need to
scrap material in order to get
everything across,
stories, while I think stories are
incredibly important, you may want to
shorten those stories or perhaps take a
couple stories out altogether because
those can eat up a lot of time. And if
you are pushed to have a much smaller
amount of time that you're given for
your speech, that might be the best way
to do it. You may be able to hear it in
my voice, but I'm at the tail end of
getting over a cold. And this can happen
sometimes when we have a speaking
opportunity. A few days before the
presentation, all of a sudden, we start
to get sick. What do we do in that
situation?
And of course, there's different levels
and ranges to this. Maybe you're at the
very tail end like I am right now, and
you can still give a presentation.
Maybe don't shake hands with everyone
who's at the conference, but you can
still get through it even if you're not
operating at 100%.
But that's different than being highly
contagious and in the middle of a
sickness where it's almost irresponsible
for you to show up to the event. So,
what you want to do is step number one,
communicate clearly with the event
organizer and let him or her know that
you're the current stage of of where
you're at so that it can be a
collaborative decision on whether you
proceed. But if it's important that you
be there, you can still show up. You can
still present, but reduce your pressure
personally. Because when we're not at
100%, it's very difficult to be as as
charismatic as we usually would from the
stage and trying to add in all of the
vocal range and variety.
And instead, really focus on what the
core message is and the mo most
important points. And then strategically
limit your body language a little bit or
at least your body movement across the
stage because if you're not feeling 100%
it can be hard to be really animated and
moving everywhere. So be a little bit
more strategic and purposeful with your
movements.
Slow down your pacing a little bit. You
don't have to be talking super quickly.
It might be an opportunity to have some
more audience engagement, asking the
audience for their feedback, for their
interpretations of different things. And
when you can make these presentations
collaborative, one, it's often a more
interesting presentation, but that's
reducing some of the pressure on
yourself to be generating all of the
energy for the event. So getting sick is
a tough one, but I have seen many
speakers, even speakers who have lost
their voice, who are still able to power
through. The last thing I'll say about
this is you can mention it. Don't draw
too much attention to the fact, but you
can for context. You can tell the
audience that you are just getting over
this cold and that you're going to do
your best to deliver with energy.
Audiences are going to be empathetic.
They're going to understand your
situation, but there's still an
opportunity for you to deliver at an
incredibly professional level, even if
you're not quite 100%. You're in the
middle of a presentation and you've just
delivered a joke that usually gets
pretty good laughs from the audience,
but this particular audience is not
laughing. And when you look out at the
faces in the crowd,
there's not even that many smiles.
That can be one of the most daunting
public speaking nightmare for any
presenter.
But I would encourage you to power
through in these situations. If you are
midsp speech and you're having doubts
about your ability to give a
presentation,
know that it is a normal feeling. This
happens to every presenter. It certainly
happened to me many times. But just
because the audience isn't laughing when
maybe other rooms have laughed in the
past, you need to know that there are so
many factors contributing to that. One
of my favorite speakers, Sean Kungo,
often talks about the room dynamics that
it is much more difficult to get an
audience laughing in a big conference
ballroom with high ceilings and where
everyone is spaced out versus a small
tight room where everyone is packed in
together. And there's a reason that many
comedy venues are that way, that they're
packed in tight and they have the low
ceilings. And it's because it traps that
energy and it allows it to
encourage more laughter. And when others
start laughing, more of the room starts
laughing and it becomes contagious. And
so there's a lot at stake here. There
may be also audiences who are nervous to
laugh in front of their co-workers or
who knows the dynamic. But what you need
to know is that just because you see an
audience member looking at you a certain
way or maybe they're on their phone, it
doesn't mean they're not still
interested in what you're saying. So the
most important thing to do is to
practice and ensure that you're prepared
for whatever it is that you're talking
about and then deliver confidently. Even
if it doesn't feel like it's going your
way from the stage, overcome that. Power
through. And you'll be surprised how
many times afterward audiences will say,
"That was fantastic."
And it'll surprise you because it didn't
look like the audience was enjoying it,
but power through. And that is the best
way to handle this situation like a
professional. A friend of mine inspired
me to make this video because she told
me about her public speaking nightmare
that she had where she was presenting
virtually to an audience, but she
couldn't see anyone on the screen. They
had their camera turned off, they had
their mic off, and she described it like
talking into a void. And it was one of
her most challenging public speaking
situations.
Understandably so, because we often
thrive off of audience feedback. And
when we can't see anyone on screen or
hear anybody through a virtual
presentation,
it is hard to know whether it's going
well or not. And so I asked my friend,
what did she do to overcome this? And
she said she really had to focus in. She
controlled her cadence. She slowed down
a little bit and she focused on making
eye contact with the camera and she was
confident in her material and she
powered through and to her surprise at
the end of it they said it went
phenomenal. She did a great job even
though she had that doubt mid
presentation. So, if you are ever giving
a virtual presentation and you don't
have that audience feedback or you tend
to look down at the Zoom screen and a
bunch of people have turned their
cameras off or people look like they're
not enjoying themselves,
keep that confidence. You never know why
it is people might have turned the
camera off. You don't know how many
people are still getting a lot of value.
And so it's important that you continue
to be confident and deliver that
material you were asked to deliver. The
final public speaking nightmare that can
happen from time to time is we
completely forget what it is that we're
supposed to be talking about or we
mentally freeze.
And this is a situation that can be
really really scary. And what many
amateur speakers do will instantly
verbally say everything that's going
through their mind. They'll say, "Oh,
shoot. I lost my place. Uh, what was I
talking about again? I'm so sorry. Oh, I
got to remember. It was really important
what I was going to say."
But for a professional speaker, for you,
what you want to do is pause, stay calm.
If you have water nearby, grab a sip of
your water. Open the cap. Take a moment
to think while the audience is is there.
It's not going to look crazy the fact
that you're taking a sip of water
and try to mentally zoom out. Think
about your presentation from the
thousand foot level. What have you
covered off? What have you not covered
off? And then once you've had that
moment to pause, to think, to have a sip
of water, jump back in as close as
possible, remembering that your audience
doesn't know everything you have planned
for the presentation. So even if you
skip over something, you may have an
opportunity to circle back and revisit
that later on, but try to think on the
high level, okay, what have I already
covered and what's a natural landing
spot? Even if I forgot my place in the
middle of a story, what is the general
area that I can return to and reiterate
a point and it's going to feel as
seamless as possible. I hope this video
on overcoming public speaking nightmares
has been beneficial to you. If it has,
please subscribe to my channel, which is
one of the best ways you can help me
grow and help others with their
communication needs. and YouTube is
recommending a video for you to check
out right now. And finally, if you're
somebody who especially maybe you're a
professional or an executive, you want
to level up your public speaking skills,
check out my standtore and how you can
work with me one- on-one. That link is
below in the video description. Let's
get serious about improving your public
speaking skills.